feat: improving e2e test strategy (#71)
open-feature/ofep: OFEP-sdk-e2e-test-strategy.md

This means,

- SDK cannot introduce tests till flagd contribution is there
- Breaking changes require disabling e2e tests till
  - Change propagate to respective SKD contribution repository
  - flagd implements the breaking change
- Cannot write tests till
  - flagd implements the feature

Besides, there is a circular dependency among `Go SDK` - `Go SDK Contribution` - `flagd` [6] which will become 
harder to maintain in the long run.

## Proposal

Given OpenFeature has a lot of community interest and SDK, I am proposing to introduce a simplified e2e test strategy.
The test strategy must comply with the following,

- Tests must not use mocks and must run against an OpenFeature compliant provider
- Tests must be self-contained except for test definitions which are common to all SDKs
- Tests must verify error scenarios 

To fulfill these needs, I am proposing a simple in-memory provider to be built into the SDK and maintained alongside the SDK implementation. 

## In-memory provider

I am proposing following features for the in-memory provider,

- Provider should be initiated with a pre-defined set of flags

> - Flag structure definition will be based on test requirements and must be minimal

Reviewer: I'm not sure about a set of pre-defined flags.

I think I'd rather have a constructor were you could pass a simple map of flags. In addition to "hard" flag values, some map entries could be lambdas that accept a context and return some flag value (to test context parsing/passing of the SDK under test).

Author: Yes, this is what I meant - the provider is constructed with a set of flags. I will update the description to emphasize this. 

💯  agree on context handling with lambda/callbacks - great idea to minimalize internals and let the caller control the context handling,

- EvaluationContext support for at least few predefined parameters

> - Must provider SDK contract implementations where needed (ex:- consider `NoOpProvider` [7])

Reviewer 2: I suggest having an internal package used for testing, similar to what OTel has:
- Java: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/aab71593270111ad3bd01e5e1c44a2e50aacf2c5/sdk/testing/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/sdk/testing/exporter/InMemorySpanExporter.java
- Go: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/blob/c404a30b96f6117ac677c5e15119a4d724e2ab3e/sdk/trace/tracetest/exporter.go

Author: Thanks for the references. Yeah, packaging should highlight  the fact that these are test related

Author: Went with this approach - https://github.com/Kavindu-Dodan/go-sdk/tree/feat/in-memory-provider-for-testing/pkg/openfeature/testing :)

> - Must provider SDK contract implementations where needed (ex:- consider `NoOpProvider` [7])

Reviewer: I think we need to add support for events too (init and shutdown) - some simple mechanism to update the flag config as well, which would send flag change events.

Soon we will have another gherkin test suite for events (see [here](https://github.com/open-feature/test-harness/issues/50)).

Author: Yeah agree, I will include this point/sub point

Author: I think this is needed by default. For the initial implementation, we can aim to replace flagd with in-memory setup. Later on, we can build the spec compliance tests

Author: Proposed features set expanded - https://github.com/open-feature/ofep/pull/71/files#diff-6ab079685fe6f42602ada091a5c5e3f40ec770e26488b8d33373f9d4084a3497R40

## OFEP: SDK end-to-end test strategy

## State: Drafting

This OFEP proposes to introduce a simplified process to write SDK end-to-end(e2e) tests

## Background

> SDKs are at the core of OpenFeature as they contain language specific implementations of the OpenFeature specification [1]

Reviewer 3: Please update the links to be footnotes. You can see the syntax here.

https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax#footnotes

Author: This is cool - see the preview : https://github.com/open-feature/ofep/blob/2f7c045aebfe0c7ebed76354ac6f57628a91ad2c/OFEP-sdk-e2e-test-strategy.md#user-content-fn-2-b1b3f960f2d98fa55a3fcd378c954b6f

## OFEP: SDK end-to-end test strategy

## State: Drafting

This OFEP proposes to introduce a simplified process to write SDK end-to-end(e2e) tests

## Background

SDKs are at the core of OpenFeature as they contain language specific implementations of the OpenFeature specification [1]

For testing of the SDKs, current approach uses gherkin step definitions [2] contained in OpenFeature/test-harness [3] repository.
And the test implementations use a real instance of flagd [4] to validate test rules.

The current approach however comes with a problem. As SDK tests rely on flagd, these tests rely on SDK contributions [5].

> This means,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This means:
```

> - SDK cannot introduce tests till flagd contribution is there

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- SDK cannot introduce tests until flagd contribution is there
```

> - Breaking changes require disabling e2e tests till

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Breaking changes require disabling e2e tests until
```

> - Breaking changes require disabling e2e tests till
>   - Change propagate to respective SKD contribution repository
>   - flagd implements the breaking change

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Breaking changes require disabling e2e tests until
  - Changes propagate to respective SDK contribution repository
  - flagd implements the breaking change
```

- Cannot write tests till
  - flagd implements the feature

Besides, there is a circular dependency among `Go SDK` - `Go SDK Contribution` - `flagd` [6] which will become 
harder to maintain in the long run.

## Proposal

> Given OpenFeature has a lot of community interest and SDK, I am proposing to introduce a simplified e2e test strategy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Given OpenFeature has a lot of community interest and SDKs, I am proposing to introduce a simplified e2e test strategy.
```

> The test strategy must comply with the following,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The test strategy must comply with the following:
```

> Given OpenFeature has a lot of community interest and SDK, I am proposing to introduce a simplified e2e test strategy.
> The test strategy must comply with the following,
> 
> - Tests must not use mocks and must run against an OpenFeature compliant provider
> - Tests must be self-contained except for test definitions which are common to all SDKs
> - Tests must verify error scenarios 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Given OpenFeature has a lot of community interest and SDK, I am proposing to introduce a simplified e2e test strategy.
Gherkin tests must:
- not use mocks and must run against an OpenFeature compliant provider
- be self-contained except for test definitions which are common to all SDKs
- verify error scenarios 
```

I disagree with the wording of making this all tests, but if you're specifically referring to the gherkin tests, this seems fine with me.

Author: @justinabrahms Good point 🤔  my original intention of the OFEP was on e2e tests (Gherkin test suite). This is why I packaged the POC implementation of Go under `testing` [1]. And this closely follows the OTel testing framework  discussed here [2]

I am open to opinions here.

[1] - https://github.com/Kavindu-Dodan/go-sdk/tree/feat/in-memory-provider-for-testing/pkg/openfeature/testing
[2] - https://github.com/open-feature/ofep/pull/71#discussion_r1255278514

Reviewer 4: I'm +1 w/ my proposed change.

Author: Just to confirm, your proposal is to make the in-memory provider SDK a built-in provider (not only for testing but as a fully-fledged provider). I can reword the proposal if there is no objection from others

Reviewer: > Just to confirm, your proposal is to make the in-memory provider SDK a built-in provider (not only for testing but as a fully-fledged provider). I can reword the proposal if there is no objection from others

I'm not against this. Obviously it's real-work usage will have a limited value, but I think it's fine to consider it a "real" provider, with more usage beyond testing.

Author: Then I will reword the OFEP to highlight this fact. The in-memory provider will be bundled with SDK and not necessarily a test only provider.

Author: @justinabrahms & @toddbaert expanded the in-memory provider to be a general provider (not test only) [1]

[1] - https://github.com/open-feature/ofep/blob/ec965bcf29f7eab763f04a46c1cf19e1d55ba5f8/OFEP-sdk-e2e-test-strategy.md#in-memory-provider

To fulfill these needs, I am proposing a simple in-memory provider to be built into the SDK and maintained alongside the SDK implementation. 

## In-memory provider

I am proposing following features for the in-memory provider,

- Flag structure definition will be based on test requirements and must be minimal
- Provider is initiated with a pre-defined set of flags provided to constructor
- EvaluationContext support should be provided through callbacks/lambda expressions to minimize implementation

> - Must provider SDK contract implementations where needed (ex:- consider `NoOpProvider` [7])

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Must provide SDK contract implementations where needed (ex:- consider `NoOpProvider` [7])
```
